# Slow and Steady

After a long break from the project (almost a whole month, whew...) with me collecting my thoughts, I have settled on going slower and steadier.

# Hot Reloading Native Code and its Implications

I have built a proof of concept for a hot-reloadable game core, loaded by a platform layer binary.
Basically the user starts the binary and it the dynamically finds the actual game in the shape of a dynamic library.
Currently it just loads it from the place it's located by default after `zig build`, but it's easy to imagine a common app folder in a canonical place on the computer, containing different versions distributed by a core game server in the cloud.

I will sit down and finish this up such that it is properly designed for extending later to add this network sharing.
Imagine playing with your friends, and you have an old version of the game; during game setup, the newest version is sent to you, and you can enjoy the updates!

It could technically even be possible to update a live game the moment a new release comes out, but I doubt we want that for several reasons.
One big reason is that it would create a load spike on the upload servers. You could mitigate that with an enforced gradual rollout and a torrent system, but that's a lot of work.
An even bigger reason is that it'd require us to make zero breaking changes from any version to any other. This means we'd live with bad design decisions for longer than we likely want to.
We would have to write migration scripts which migrate data forward from one version to the next, and these migrations require time to execute. Updates may also contain new assets requiring a slow download (although it feels unlikely today when it's just me and I plan to do things procedurally).
On top, an update could contain rebalancing changes, which would throw a competitive game on its end.
Maybe users want to read up before upgrading, and enter their next session prepared?
Even if it'd be a cool feature, we're not aiming to create a general engine or an MMO, so I consider the matter closed; we won't do live updates.

> DECISION: We don't do live updates to live game sessions for the reasons listed in the rambling.

# Design Value > Implementation Value

I think it's very important to spend the time to properly design things like this; it only took around ten minutes to think this through and write down my thoughts.
Time well spent if it means avoiding coding for days on end to ship useless features we'd have to maintain and integrate and fix bugs for!

# Next, Mods!

After the platform/game split is made proper with hot reloading finished up, I'm concerned with modding. I feel like this could impact the game design quite a bit.
In the end, it's really important to be able to iterate quickly on ideas. Hot reloading plays into this theme, I think it's very important.
But more importantly, it would be fun and inspiring to have a community of content creators which connect, build, and share mods together!
I don't yet know how I want to implement it, and I think it's important to approach it from several angles at once.
One thing I do know is that we need the same distribution mechanism as the main game, and that there will be an acyclic dependency graph between mods.

Is "the game" as I think of it today perhaps also a mod?
I'm not certain, because my intuition tells me that the core game is more low level than other mods, but perhaps this is a dumb idea.
If the core game is itself just mods, it requires good modding capabilities, which means they will be implemented, and we could gain benefits like crazy people overriding visual shaders, the GUI style, or even sound processing.
That could be fun, if executed well!

# Circles (oO.0)

As the mod concept crystallizes, we will need to up the platform layer so that it exposes good primitives for modders to interact with.
I think one key abstraction will be a circular buffer FIFO SPSC queue system to send data between mods and the platform layer.
It will be fun to learn about these and make our own NIH implementation :). Here's an example: https://github.com/rigtorp/SPSCQueue

# Memory Land

Another important aspect will be memory management. I will want mods to predefine their memory consumption by preallocating all memory up front.
I think Tiger Style and NASA's Power of Ten rules are very influential, they resonate with me a lot.
We should investigate large pages and write our own custom allocator. Everything is about the precious memory in the end.

# Decision Log

Another thing; I think it would be very valuable to have a decision log from the very start.
The hard part with writing a decision log is to write it at the right granularity: we don't want to clutter it with irrelevant details, but we also don't want to miss something important.
How do we decide what decision to log?
I think we need to define what value we want out of the log.

## Goals

1. It could be fun (and instructive) to see the path taken once we're gotten far enough that achieving something similar feels distant.
2. Writing down a decision could help improve its quality, by requiring extra time to reflect and explain its rationale. Again, proper design saves time and ups end quality, yay!
3. If we (it's just me today, but I choose to have my hopes up) onboard more people, or if we forget why something looks the way it looks, we easily find out if it's documented.

Ok, so I'm clearly motivated to have it.

> DECISION: We pre-design everything in ramblings, enabling retrospectives, upskilling, and saving net time developing great things.

## Format

What should the format of the log be?
Ramblings contain fluid text and are chronological. A decision log should also be sorted by time, because decisions occur over time first and foremost.
If we design well from the start, as we aim to, topics will vary more than they reoccur, so sorting by topic is in vain.
One could simply perform a text search for topics over the log to find relevant decisions and ramblings instead.
All this applies also to the rambling!

I think all that remains is a nice summary. The rambling should already be indexed by date, the topic will be the heading currently being written, and the decision goes at the bottom.
From now on then, we can simply say that before code is written, we design, taking decisions, in ramblings.
If we put it in the same file, it will be hard to extract just a succinct list of all decisions, but on the upside we will have clear explanations and the thought process visible.
What if we say we don't need summaries, as they'd just end up throwing away interesting details?
It's super boring to read a robotic text, but it's important to be able to UNDERSTAND a decision, and I can already see from these paragraphs that it's hard. A summary is required.

Let's simply add decisions summary inline, using a subheading, anywhere. If we format it in a standard way, it will be possible to automatically extract decisions later!

> DECISION: A decision is valid when it is documented like this one, in this format: (line boundary)`> DECISION: What and why`(line boundary), as this is easy to automatically extract and relate to topics and dates via location.

## Indexing

If we are many people authoring these files at the same time, more than one file could pop up in a single day.
If only one person modifies a file at a time, we can use that person's name or alias in the filename.
If a team modifies a file together, we can put the team name.
This is getting complicated, and I think ramblings are inherently personal. You write your own ramblings, you don't delegate thinking.
I also believe that there is always somebody that must mark a decision as final, so all points to a rambling per day and developer.
I like how this design should lead to autonomy and trust!

Let's combine ISO date `yyyy-MM-dd` with user alias. What separator to use between them doesn't matter, as ISO date always contains exactly 10 characters, so it's trivial to parse.
Let's stylistically prefer to go with `_` (snake case) over `-` (kebab case) whenever we can, because it's generally allowed in more places, like instance variable names, and arguably reads better because it resembles a space.
That you on many popular keyboard layouts need to hold down Shift to produce `_`, but not `-`, is hardly even a minor inconvenience.
I don't believe we are bounded by the speed at which we type characters (or I wouldn't be writing this paragraph in the first place), and the difference in time and effort is negligible between the two.

> DECISION: Ramblings files are named `${ISO_DATE}_${DEVELOPER_ALIAS}.md`, as this helps uniquely index every decision over time.
> DECISION: Decisions are 1-indexed ("by ordinal") within a topic to help disambiguate them.

The decisions above have index `2024-05-27/majg0/Decision Log/Indexing/1` and `2024-05-27/majg0/Decision Log/Indexing/2` respectively.

# Mods Index

Now that we have a decision log, I wanted to write down what we settled above with not doing live updates, and I realised there's untapped potential in the decision here.
First, we will implement a robust versioning scheme where mods are indexed by name and version, such that all version of the same mod can live on forever once released.
On disk, we store these in our own application directory so we don't require elevated privileges. We can use this directory as a distributed cache, with the master sitting on some server cloud.

More on this another day, I'm off to sleep, happy with the way the decision log turned out. Now I want an automated decision extractor :D
