# Directory Structure

I feel like the biggest thing missing is a proper directory structure to help us organize the effort of doing cross platform, testing, and mods correctly.

Let's sketch something out!

We know we have an executable to ship. This is what the player expects to play. This is what we boot and run.
It's a native executable, which must be compiled for a specific combination of at least operating system, instruction set architecture, and potential game platform (e.g. Steam vs custom).

# Platform Layer

The Steam SDK ships with a multitude of APIs, like networking, achievements and input. We will want to host our own for some of these, while some others would be Steam-specific.
It could be an idea to build our platform layer in a way that you can switch configuration of whether to use Steam networking vs custom networking at runtime. In general, runtime is awesome.
That would mean that we compile the executable what we must compile it for: OS and ISA. Steam integration could be dynamically configured via CLI parameters and runtime selections.
Baking it won't roll well, as we shouldn't ship one game platform's code onto another. E.g. we can't ship Steam SDK stuff to Nintendo Switch, and so on.
We could turn it inside-out and have the game library manage the game platform integration. I think this makes sense, because we may need to do menu and graphics tweaks etc to make a tight integration. That's better!

> DECISION: The platform layer is OS/ISA specific, so that we can have less build targets, and more runtime flexibility.
> DECISION: Game platforms need custom game code, so the game will be tailored individually per game platform, and each target version will manage its own game platform layer separately.

Our own game platform is just a special case!

## Components

So what goes into the platform layer?

Mainly:

- memory allocation
- dynamic library loading
- file I/O
- network I/O
- window management and HID (Hardware Input Device: mouse/keyboard) input events
- input layout translation
- locale data
- hardware performance
- high resolution clock
- video
- audio
- fonts
- controllers
- endianness
- child processes

There is probably way more that I can't think about now, and also it's likely that different operating systems have different granularity on their APIs.
E.g. IIRC MacOS has an extensive audio graph, while e.g. Linux does not.

## Interface

Anyway, it's quite clear that we can have a common interface that each platform must expose an implementation for.
We can start small and work our way through the list such that when we need something, we add it then.
Luckily enough, I have all three major OSs at home.

There will naturally be a of lot work initially to get us running on all platforms, but it is definitely doable.
Let's start small with loading our own game executable, and allocating some memory on startup.

# Code Organization

Now, how do we organize the code base?

We need a hardware platform layer:

```sh
src/
src/platform/
src/platform/${platform}/memory.zig
src/platform/${platform}/file_system.zig
src/platform/${platform}/network.zig
src/platform/${platform}/window_management.zig
src/platform/${platform}/...
src/platform/${platform}/main.zig
```

which is basically just responsible for providing a running event loop and some utility functionality, to the game layer:

```
src/game/core/...
src/game/platform/Steam/...
src/game/platform/custom/...
src/game/editor/...
```

where we also included e.g. an editor.

We also might want some sort of plugin layer. Such a layer could allow plugins to leverage platform-independent game stuff like add graphics and add behaviours.

While we could put that in the codebase, it's good to think that we will outsource it.
Arguably, you could say the same about the game layer, and even the platform layer.
Let's explore what that would mean...

## Headers vs Source

If we outsource the plugin layer, it means anybody can build and provide a plugin.
This means we can't couple it to our infrastructure.
It means that people will have to set up their own build.zig and upwards.
They would require either header files (with declarations) or raw zig source (including definitions),
for everything that the consumer could call from the lower layer.

It's supposed to be possible to emit header files, but it's apparently broken right now: https://github.com/ziglang/zig/issues/18188.
If that starts working, it would be golden. In the meantime, we could maintain our own header files.

We could also ship raw zig code instead, and it's possible that this is a viable legal option.
I want users to own the game once they buy it, but I want to retain legal power.
I need to learn more about this. I don't want to accidentally give up power that I'd later miss.

Regardless of whether we ship zig code, I think header files are a good idea, as it allows easier implementation of plugins using other languages, if somebody wants to build that.

Again, duty (sleep) calls, but there is more to investigate here w.r.t. code organization.

## Libraries

To finish off, I just have to say that I think we're onto finding a pattern where it's shared libraries all the way around.
The platform layer would load one library by being told so by the user, it would expect the platform layer to be present, and could in turn potentially expose its own set of functionality, loading other libraries based on what the user selects; they could in turn plug into this higher layer functionality, and so on. All we need is a simple way to load/unload/get libraries at runtime, and to expose/consume functions from them. This will be good.
